MAN: One of the last jobs
I had in Yellowstone was
delivering the
mail on snowmobile.
There I was in the world's
first national park, and I
remember going down
into Hayden Valley.
There were bison crossing over
the road--2,000-pound mammals
crossing over the road,
and it was so cold.
It was about 60 below zero.
And the bison, as they
breathed, their exhalation
would seem to crystallize in
the air around them, and there
were these sheets, these
ropey stands of crystals kind
of flowing down
from their breath.
And I saw them, and they just
moved their heads and were
looking at me, and I remember
thinking that if I had not
been on that machine, I would
have thought I had been thrust
fully back into the
Pleistocene, back into
the Ice Age.
And I remember just
stopping and turning it off
because the only way you could
hear was to turn that thing
off, and I would turn it off,
and I would listen, and I felt
like this was the first day...
and this morning was the first
time the sun had ever come up
and the shadows that are being
cast right now is the first
time those shadows have
ever been cast on the earth.
And I was all alone, but I
felt I was in the presence
of everything around me
and I was never alone.
It was one of those moments
when you get pulled outside
of yourself into the
environment around you,
and I felt like I was just
with the breath of the bison
as they were exhaling and
I was exhaling and they
were inhaling.
It was all kind of flowing
together, and I forgot
completely about the mail.
All I was thinking of
was that a single moment
in a place as wild as
Yellowstone, and most
of the national parks,
can last forever.
PETER COYOTE: In 1883, a young
politician, the second son
of a prominent New York
City family, became alarmed
about reports that the vast
herds of buffalo that had once
blanketed the Great Plains
were quickly disappearing.
So he hurried west on the
Northern Pacific Railroad
and got off when he reached
the heart of the badlands
in the Dakota territory.
[Train whistle blows]
His name was Theodore
Roosevelt.
He was 24 years old, and he
was afraid the buffalo would
become extinct before he
got the chance to shoot one.
He hired a local guide and
endured days of rough travel
by horseback until he finally
came across a solitary buffalo
bull, killed it, and then
removed its head for shipment
back to New York to be
mounted on his wall.
MAN: Roosevelt loved to kill.
He liked to shoot quadrupeds.
At times he basically said
he didn't trust Americans who
wouldn't hunt, and he hinted
that he didn't believe that
Americans should have
citizenship who weren't
willing to kill a quadruped.
COYOTE: That first trip to the
west, Roosevelt said later,
was an important
turning point for him.
Over the next several years,
he would return again
and again to take more hunting
trips into the mountains,
to ranch on the open plains,
to build up his health
and character by pursuing what
he called "the strenuous life,"
to become, in his own words,
"at heart as much a Westerner
as I am an Easterner."
Roosevelt would never lose his
love of hunting, but in time
he would learn that there were
much bigger and more important
trophies to pursue.
[Roaring]
WOMAN: Our national parks
are an idea, an idea based
on generosity--not just for
our own species, but
for all species.
I think that is profoundly
original in terms of a people
that say, we value
wild nature in place.
We are of this place.
And I think it's our
own declaration of both
independence and
interdependence.
MAN: The great wilds of our
country, once held to be
boundless and inexhaustible,
are being rapidly invaded
and overrun in every
direction, and everything
destructible in them
is being destroyed.
How far destruction may go
is not easy to guess.
Every landscape, low and high,
seems doomed to be trampled
and harried.
John Muir.
COYOTE: As the 19th century
entered its final decade,
Americans began to take
stock of what they had made
of the continent they had
been so busily subduing.
Only 50 years earlier,
the nation's western border
had been the spine of
the Rocky Mountains.
Buffalo numbering in the
tens of millions teemed
on the Great Plains.
Vast forests had never
heard the ring of an ax.
Indian peoples stilled
controlled most of the west.
[Train whistle blowing]
Now the nation stretched
all the way to the Pacific.
Railroads had pushed into
every corner of the country.
Indians had been
systematically dispossessed
from their homelands and
forced onto reservations.
White settlements had sprung
up in so many places that the
director of the census of 1890
announced he could no longer
find an American frontier.
The bountiful land Thomas
Jefferson considered nature's
nation had seemingly
been conquered.
MAN: The moment that Americans
start setting aside these
national parks is also the
moment of sort of the most
explosive exploitation of
so many elements
of the national landscape.
It's the cutting down of
the north woods
at an extraordinary rate.
It's the destruction of the
bison herds, the elimination
of the passenger pigeons.
There is so much being
destroyed in the name
of progress in the United
States in the late 19th
century that the parks are a
kind of reaction against that.
They are saying, if we keep
going the way we're going,
we're going to use it all up,
and some of this is
so beautiful, so essential to
who we are as a people that
we've got to put walls around
these parts and protect them
from ourselves.
COYOTE: By 1890, the United
States has established 4
national parks: Yellowstone,
the world's first; the high
country of Yosemite; and
two groves of big trees
in California--General
Grant and Sequoia.
The army had recently
been placed in charge
of protecting them all.
[Gunshot]
Nonetheless, park wildlife
were still routinely killed.
Cows and sheep still
overgrazed park meadows.
Ancient forests were
still endangered.
And tourists seemed intent
on squandering the treasures
a previous generation
had bequeathed them.
The park idea, not yet
a quarter century old,
still seemed an
uncertain experiment.
The issues of what was
permissible and proper
for people who visited the
parks were still unresolved.
But as a new century was
about to dawn, a handful
of Americans began to question
the headlong rush that had
caused so much devastation
and saw in the national parks
a seed of hope that at least
some pristine places could be
saved before it was too late.
Among them would be the young
assemblyman from New York City
who had gone west on a boyish
impulse but who would mature
into a president whose most
lasting legacy was rescuing
large portions of
America from destruction.
MAN: Surely our people do not
understand even yet the rich
heritage that is theirs.
There can be nothing in the
world more beautiful than
the Yosemite, the groves of
giant sequoias and redwoods,
the canyon of the Yellowstone,
the canyon of the Colorado,
the Three Tetons.
And our people should see to
it that they are preserved
for their children and their
children's children forever
with their majestic
beauty all unmarred.
DIFFERENT MAN: Dear reader,
today I'm in the Yellowstone
Park, and I wish I were dead.
The park is just a howling
wilderness of 3,000 square
miles, full of all imaginable
freaks of a fiery nature.
I have been through the park
in a buggy in the company of
an adventurous old lady from
Chicago and her husband,
who disapproved of the
scenery as being ungodly.
I fancy it scared them.
Rudyard Kipling.
COYOTE: In 1889, Rudyard
Kipling, a young Englishman
and aspiring writer,
was making his first tour
of the United States,
financing the trip by
writing dispatches for
newspapers overseas.
Like many foreigners, Kipling
could not resist stopping
at Yellowstone, a place
already known around the world
as the wonderland.
Most visitors in those days
were well-to-do, able to pay
the $120 train fare across
the continent to the remote
northwestern corner of
Wyoming and then $40 more
for the 5-day stagecoach trip
through the park known as
the grand tour.
The first stop was the hotel
at Mammoth Hot Springs,
where everyone unpacked
quickly and then rushed to buy
souvenirs and post cards
made by the park's resident
photographer, Frank J. Haynes.
Many guests were perfectly
content to view the Mammoth
Springs from the comfort of
the hotel veranda, but some
bought guide books and
hiked up to the terraces
for a closer look.
MAN AS RUDYARD KIPLING:
I found a basin which some
learned hotelkeeper has
christened Cleopatra's Pitcher
or Mark Antony's Whiskey Jug
or something equally poetical.
I do not know the
depth of that wonder.
The eye looked down into
an abyss that communicated
directly with the central
fires of the earth.
The ground rings hollow as a
kerosene tin, and someday the
Mammoth Hotel, guests and all,
will sink into the caverns
below and be turned
into a stalactite.
COYOTE: In the morning,
the passengers loaded back
into their assigned carriages
and one by one set off toward
the park's interior, spaced
about every 500 yards to
lessen the effects of dust
that clung in the air, Kipling
wrote, as dense as a fog.
He was bemused by his fellow
tourists, especially the older
woman from Chicago sitting
next to him, who chewed gum
and talked constantly,
pontificating with her husband
on everything they
encountered, especially once
they reached the
first geyser area.
MAN AS RUDYARD KIPLING:
The old lady, regarding the
horrors of the fire holes,
could only say "Good Lord!"
at 30-second intervals.
Her husband talked about the
dreadful waste of steam power.
"And if," continued the old
lady," if we find a thing
"so dreadful as all that steam
and sulfur allowed on the face
"on the earth, mustn't we
believe there is something
"10,000 times
more terrible below,
"prepared for our destruction?"
COYOTE: At noon, they stopped
at a tent hotel, a place
called Larry's, run by
Larry Matthews, a friendly
and loquacious Irishman
known for lavishing special
attention on his
gentille guests.
MAN AS RUDYARD KIPLING: Larry
enveloped us all in the golden
glamour of his speech,
'ere we had descended.
And the tent with the rude
trestle table became a palace,
the rough fare
became delicacies
of Delmonico's, and we,
the abashed recipients
of Larry's imperial bounty.
It was only later that I
discovered that I had paid 8
shillings for tinned beef,
biscuits, and beer.
COYOTE: Like the other
establishments within
the park, Larry's encouraged
tourists to believe that all
the water in Yellowstone
was impregnated with sulfur
and therefore unfit
for drinking.
It was untrue, but it
boosted sales of mineral water
and beer at the inflated
price of 50 cents a bottle
and created roadsides
littered with empties.
When the parade of
stagecoaches reached the lower
geyser basin, the tourists
encamped for two nights
at the Fire Hole Hotel,
or later, the more luxurious
Fountain Hotel, built at a
cost of $100,000 and capable
of handling 350 guests,
complete with electric lights,
steam heat, and hot baths fed
by one of the thermal springs.
The next two days of the grand
tour were devoted exclusively
to visiting the spectacular
array of geysers and thermal
pools and fumaroles,
the largest concentration
of them in the world.
Tourists would peer down
the throat of gaping holes
in the ground, taking their
chances that a geyser was not
about to erupt in their face.
They marveled at the beauty of
translucent pools of turquoise
water, washed pieces of linen
in Handkerchief Pool, which
turned the cloth
white as snow.
MAN AS RUDYARD KIPLING: They
are guarded by soldiers who
patrol with loaded six-shooters
in order that the
tourists may not bring up
fence-rails and sink them
in a pool or chip the fretted
tracery of the formations
with a geological hammer or,
walking where the crust is too
thin, foolishly cook himself.
COYOTE: No visit to
Yellowstone was considered
complete without seeing Old
Faithful go off on schedule.
MAN AS RUDYARD KIPLING: All
the young ladies remarked that
it was elegant and betook
themselves to writing their
names in the bottoms
of shallow pools.
Nature fixes the insult
indelibly, and the after-years
will learn that Hattie, Sadie,
Mamie, Sophie, and so forth
have taken out their hairpins
and scrawled in the face
of Old Faithful.
COYOTE: The last night in the
park was spent at a hotel near
the majestic Grand Canyon
of the Yellowstone.
The view from its edge was
considered the inspirational
grand finale.
Even the cynical Rudyard
Kipling was impressed.
MAN AS RUDYARD KIPLING: All
I can say is that without
warning or preparation,
I looked into a gulf 1,700
feet deep with eagles
and fish hawks circling far
below, and the sides of that
gulf were one wild welter
of color--crimson, emerald,
cobalt, ocher, amber, honey
splashed with port wine,
snow white, vermillion, lemon,
and silver-gray
in wide washes.
So far below that no sound
of its strife could reach us,
the Yellowstone River ran,
a finger-wide strip
of jade green.
Now I know what it is to sit
enthroned amid the clouds
of sunset.
COYOTE: The final day
consisted of a stagecoach ride
back to the start of the tour,
lunch once more at Larry's,
shouting out the names
of their home states
and countries to passing
wagons filled with fresh loads
of tourists heading into the
park, dinner at the hotel
at Mammoth Hot Springs,
then on to the train waiting
at the station to carry them
and their memories away.
MAN AS RUDYARD KIPLING: "And
to think," said the old lady
from Chicago, "that this
showplace has been going
"on all these days, and
none of we ever saw it."
Rudyard Kipling.
MAN: Those first few
years--and maybe this was OK
because there were so few
visitors--but it was
just wide open.
Those early visitors trying to
figure out how best to enjoy
Yellowstone were very quickly
teaching the managers what
wasn't gonna work.
Nobody knew how to act in
a national park.
It hadn't been decided yet.
COYOTE: Having created the
national parks, Congress had
not seen fit to provide some
kind of authority to oversee
them, and in 1886, it even
refused to appropriate any
money whatsoever.
General Phillip Sheridan had
been forced to send the U.S.
Cavalry into Yellowstone
simply to maintain some
semblance of order.
By the 1890s, this
temporary arrangement had
become permanent.
Up to 4 troops of cavalry
were stationed at the newly
constructed Fort Yellowstone
near the Mammoth Hot Springs.
SCHULLERY: I think the odds
are really good that if
the army hadn't been sent in,
Yellowstone wouldn't
have made it.
Writing your name on things
was such a proud tradition
that people would put their
address, too, and the soldiers
could just very simply go
out and write them all down,
head back to the hotel,
and look through the hotel
registers and find these
people and drag them by the
collar back out so they could
spend some time scrubbing
their name off.
COYOTE: The army was expected
to patrol 2 million acres
on horseback, doing their best
to stop poachers and vandals
and campers careless
with their fires.
But the troopers were hampered
by the fact that the federal
park existed in a
legal no man's land.
Usually their only recourse
was a warning, or in the most
serious cases,
expulsion from the park.
Army engineers built and
improved the roads and bridges
that guided travel within the
park to the places tourists
wanted to see, while leaving
major portions of Yellowstone
a roadless and
totally wild expanse.
With the tourists gone,
the cavalrymen found
themselves holed up in
small cabins scattered
around the park, patrolling
for poachers on skis in frigid
temperatures and
lethal snowstorms.
Frederick Remington, when he
visited and traveled with
the soldiers in Yellowstone,
said that they were very fond
of saying that Yellowstone
had 3 seasons: July, August,
and winter, and they hated it.
COYOTE: Men were lost
transporting mail from one
isolated outpost to another.
They died in avalanches.
Some may have been killed
by poachers, who were often
better equipped and more
experienced at maneuvering
through the back
country in deep snow.
MAN: In my last report,
I noted the death of Private
Matthews of Troop B,
6th Cavalry, while on detached
service for the mail.
A most thorough search for
his remains was continued
for almost 6 months
after his disappearance.
His body was found
early in June.
It was evident that he
became lost and while in that
condition became crazed
and perished from the cold.
Captain George Anderson.
COYOTE: The cavalry was also
in charge of the nation's 3
other national parks--General
Grant, Sequoia, and the high
country surrounding Yosemite.
Each spring, troops stationed
at the Presidio in San
Francisco would make the
2-week, 250-mile ride to the
Sierras and patrol the 3 parks
during the summer season.
Some of them were African
Americans, the celebrated
buffalo soldiers of the 9th
and 10th Cavalry who had made
a name for themselves
in the Indian wars.
Their commander was Captain
Charles Young, born into
slavery in Kentucky, whose
father had escaped bondage
during the Civil War to
enlist in the Union Army.
Young followed his father's
example of military service,
becoming the third black man
to graduate from West Point
and the first to be put in
charge of a national park.
JOHNSON: If you're an enlisted
man and then you see
an African American
officer--an officer--
that stays in your mind,
and it also sparks a fire in
your own sense of self-worth,
your own sense of what is
possible in this world,
because you might say to
yourself, "If he could do
"that, maybe I could
do that as well."
So he was a walking
inspiration to the enlisted
men in the 9th
and 10th Cavalry.
COYOTE: As superintendent of
Sequoia, Young directed his
men to complete the
first wagon road into
the Giant Forest.
They accomplished more in
one summer than had been done
in the 3 previous
years combined.
They built the
first trail to Mt. Whitney,
the highest peak in
the west, and erected fences
around the big trees to
prevent vandalism by visitors.
JOHNSON: So the early
parks--Yellowstone, Sequoia,
and Yosemite--you had
to have park protectors
because otherwise, people
would be going into those
areas doing what they've
always done--cutting trees
down, you know, for firewood,
or shooting the game, shooting
the deer to feed their family.
How do you tell someone who's
just trying to keep their
children fed, not hungry,
that it's illegal now to
shoot the game in Yosemite
or in Sequoia National Park?
And that would be a difficult
proposition if you were
a white soldier, but when you
add that overlay of race,
which is no overlay at all,
and you have an African
American, a colored man,
giving orders to people who
are not used to taking orders
from anyone who looks like me,
then you have the beginning
of a very interesting day.
COYOTE: Like their
counterparts at Yellowstone,
the troops in California had
to operate without clear legal
authority and therefore
invented techniques to protect
their parks.
When they collected travelers'
rifles upon entry and only
returned them when the
visitors left, the wildlife
began to come back.
Sheep herders defiantly
bringing their flocks into the
park's alpine meadows had been
openly scornful of the troops,
once they realized that the
army had no power of criminal
arrest and prosecution.
The soldiers then came up
with a creative solution.
JOHNSON: It was
a standard rule.
You find the sheep that are
grazing illegally in the park,
and you move the sheep out
to the eastern boundary
of the park.
You find the sheepherders,
and you move them out the
western boundary of the park.
Now, the park in
those days was 1,500
square miles, so
by the time the sheep
and the sheep herders were
reunited, well, let's just say
the season was done, and if
you have a business and your
business is herding sheep and
that happens to you more than
once or twice, you don't come
back, and I think that was
a pretty effective way of
dealing with illegal grazing
in the park.
MAN AS JOHN MUIR: For many
years, the military have guarded
the great Yellowstone Park,
and now they are guarding
the Yosemite.
They found it a desert as
far as underbrush, grass,
and flowers were concerned,
but in two years, the skin
of the mountains
is healthy again.
Blessings on Uncle
Sam's soldiers.
They have done their job well,
and every pine tree is waving
its arm for joy.
COYOTE: No one was more
thankful for the army's
presence than John Muir,
for whom the Sierra Nevada was
the range of light--mountains,
he wrote, "that were throbbing
"and pulsing with the
heartbeats of God."
WOMAN: I think John Muir
understood, as perhaps no one
else has, how essential beauty
is--natural beauty is to us.
Without beauty, we have no,
kind of, lubrication
of the human spirit.
We would just be dead, and
that's really what drove him.
That's what fueled him.
COYOTE: Clambering
ecstatically over
the mountainsides, Muir had
become a self-taught expert
in glaciers, a keen observer
and lover of everything he
encountered, from the tiniest
specks of lichen on a rock to
the mighty sequoias.
And through his magazine
articles, he had emerged as
a wilderness prophet,
a nationally known voice
for preserving the last
remaining vestiges
of America's virgin
forests and unspoiled lands.
MAN AS JOHN MUIR: Mere
destroyers--tree killers,
wool and mutton men,
spreading death and confusion
in the fairest groves and
gardens ever planted.
Let the government hasten
to cast them out and make
an end of them.
Any fool can destroy trees.
They cannot run away.
And if they could, they would
still be destroyed--chased
and hunted down as long as fun
or a dollar could be got out
of their bark hides.
Through all the wonderful,
eventful centuries since
Christ's time and long before
that, God has cared for these
trees, saved them from
drought, disease, avalanches,
and a thousand straining,
leveling tempests and floods,
but he cannot save
them from fools.
Only Uncle Sam can do that.
COYOTE: Yosemite's high
country had been designated
a national park in 1890,
but the valley itself remained
under the control of a
California state commission
and their political
appointees, a group
of "blundering, plundering,
moneymaking vote sellers,"
Muir said.
He wanted it all
transferred back to
the federal government.
Only then, he believed,
would it be safe from ruin.
In 1892, to help promote
Yosemite's protection,
Muir and a small group of
prominent Californians formed
a new organization.
They called it
the Sierra Club.
Muir enthusiastically agreed
to serve as its president,
hoping, he said, that "we
will be able to do something
"for wildness and make
the mountains glad."
[Scattered applause]
MAN: In the 19th century,
when the census bureau would
do its census, it would draw a
line that's the frontier line,
and proudly say it marches
westward, and their definition
of it had this
wonderful phrase.
It would say, in the last
10 years, this many million
of acres have been "redeemed
from wilderness by
"the hand of man."
"Redeemed from wilderness
by the hand of man."
In other words, a virgin forest
is redeemed when it's cut down.
A beautiful mountain stream is
redeemed when the miners are
turned loose in it.
That symbolized what our
view of nature was as we were
rushing across the continent.
That's totally the opposite
of what John Muir would say.
Wilderness isn't
redeemed by man.
Man is redeemed by wilderness.
MAN: To know you are the first
to set foot in homes that have
been deserted for centuries
is a strange feeling.
It is as though unseen eyes
watched, wondering what aliens
were invading their
sanctuaries and why.
The dust of centuries filled
the rooms and rose in thick
clouds at every movement.
Al Wetherill.
COYOTE: A few months before
Rudyard Kipling visited
Yellowstone, cowboys
searching for stray cattle
in southwestern Colorado,
along the edge of a high
plateau known as Mesa Verde,
came upon the ruins
of an ancient city tucked
into the side of a cliff.
Using a tree trunk and their
lariats, they improvised
a ladder and descended
for a closer look.
MAN AS AL WETHERILL: It was
like treading holy ground to
go into those peaceful-looking
homes of a vanished people.
Things were arranged in the
rooms as if people might just
have been out
visiting somewhere.
COYOTE: In quick succession,
they soon came across even
more ruins nestled into the
remote canyon walls of Mesa
Verde and gave
names to them all.
Cliff Palace.
Spruce Tree House.
Balcony House.
It was the largest
concentration ever found
of the cliff dwellings--built,
occupied, and then
mysteriously deserted nearly a
thousand years earlier by
the ancestors of some of the
modern Pueblo Indians
of the southwest.
MAN AS AL WETHERILL: We knew
that if we did not break into
that charmed world, someone
else would sometime--someone
who might not love and respect
those emblems of antiquity
as we did.
COYOTE: The cowboys who
discovered the ruins were the
Wetherills--5 brothers from
a family of Quakers who had
moved to Colorado from
Kansas 8 years earlier.
The oldest was Richard,
who encouraged them all to
spend every free moment
digging among the ruins,
hoping to sell their
discoveries to museums
in big cities.
MAN AS AL WETHERILL: We had
started in as just ordinary
pothunters,
but as work progressed along
that sort of questionable
business, we developed quite a
bit of scientific knowledge by
careful work and comparisons.
COYOTE: One day a stranger
showed up, a young Swedish
nobleman with an interest
in archaeology--
Gustaf Nordenskiold.
When the Wetherills showed
him the ruins, his enthusiasm,
one of the brothers
remembered, increased almost
beyond his control.
For two months, from sunup to
sundown, he kept the Wetherill
brothers busy, teaching them
more scientific methods.
He showed them how to use
a mason's trowel instead
of a spade, digging slowly and
carefully to reveal a relic
without damaging it.
He insisted on labeling and
photographing everything
and often saved items that
no other archaeologist
of the time would have kept--
wood ash from fire pits,
dust and trash from the
floors, even dried pieces
of human excrement that one
day might help determine what
the ancient Puebloans had
been eating so long ago.
In all,
he amassed hundreds of items
which he intended to
ship home to Sweden.
But when his pack animals,
loaded down with artifacts,
reached the railway station
in Durango, Nordenskiold was
immediately arrested.
MAN: The basic problem was,
this foreigner is stealing our
relics, our bowls, our pots,
and we're not gonna allow that.
It's all right for we
Americans to steal them,
but it's not all right for
those foreigners to do it.
Gustaf's lawyer asked the
judge, under what law are we
arresting him?
And there was no law.
There was no law at all,
so they couldn't stop him.
They couldn't stop anybody,
and that probably sparked some
interest--why
isn't there a law?
COYOTE: Nordenskiold was
released and got to take his
huge shipment home to
Scandinavia, where he
published the first scientific
study of the cliff dwellers.
But the controversy had
brought worldwide attention to
Mesa Verde and to the fact
that its treasures were
completely unprotected.
MAN: We have seen the Indian
and the game retreat before
the white man and the
cattle and beheld the tide
of immigration move forward
which threatens before long to
leave no portion of our vast
territory unbroken by the
farmer's plow or untrodden
by his flocks.
There is one spot left--a
single rock about which this
tide will break and past which
it will sweep, leaving it
undefiled by the unsightly
traces of civilization.
Here in this Yellowstone Park,
the large game of the west may
be preserved from
extermination in this,
their last refuge.
George Bird Grinnell.
COYOTE: By the 1890s,
few Americans understood as
keenly as George Bird
Grinnell, the editor and owner
of "Forest and Stream"
magazine, how fearful
the price had been for the
nation's relentless expansion
across the continent.
Raised on the estate of the
famous painter and naturalist
John James Audubon at the
north end of Manhattan,
Grinnell could remember
spotting a bald eagle from his
bedroom window and watching
immense flocks of passenger
pigeons darkening the sky from
horizon to horizon as they
passed overhead.
Traveling across Kansas,
he had once encountered
a buffalo herd so vast that
his train was forced to stop
for 3 hours while the
beasts crossed the tracks.
He had hunted elk in Nebraska
when elk could still be found
on the plains, ridden with
the Pawnees in a great buffalo
chase as the Indians brought
down their prey with bows
and arrows.
Now all that and so much
more suddenly seemed gone or
on the verge of disappearing.
Passenger pigeons had been
so systematically killed that
a bird once numbering in the
hundreds of millions had been
reduced to a handful, and soon
the death of a solitary bird
in a Cincinnati zoo would
bring an end to
the species' existence.
The hide-hunters had been
equally effective
with the buffalo.
By the mid-1880s, the last of
the great free-roaming herds
had been slaughtered.
Now the only wild herd left in
the country was in Yellowstone
National Park, estimated at
only a few hundred animals.
MAN AS GEORGE BIRD GRINNELL:
For 4 centuries, we have been
killing and marketing game,
destroying it as rapidly
and as thoroughly as we knew
how, and making no provision
toward replacing the supply.
We are just beginning to
ask one another how we may
preserve the little that
remains for ourselves
and our children.
COYOTE: Grinnell regularly
used the pages of "Forest
and Stream" to try to point
Americans in a new direction.
It wasn't that he
was against hunting.
In fact, he loved to hunt.
Grinnell just feared that
without wise management,
there would be nothing
left for hunters to shoot.
He proposed the creation of
a new organization aimed
at stopping the heedless
killing of wild birds,
"in honor," Grinnell wrote,
"of the man who did more to
"teach Americans about birds of
their own land than any other
"who ever lived."
He named the group
The Audubon Society.
And when Grinnell published
a mildly critical review
of Theodore Roosevelt's book
chronicling his own western
adventures, the young author
burst into Grinnell's office
to confront him.
The two men turned the awkward
moment into the beginning
of a lasting friendship and
together formed the Boone
and Crockett Club to promote
what they called "the manly
"sport of hunting."
DUNCAN: But Grinnell had
other, larger issues in mind
that he wanted to steer Teddy
Roosevelt toward, and I think
over time he became something
of a mentor to Roosevelt,
of taking this energetic guy,
this guy who was a political
star, a rising political star,
and gradually pointing him
in directions that were
clearly in Roosevelt's heart
but needed that little tilt
from George Bird Grinnell to
bring them to fruition.
COYOTE: As president of the
new club, Theodore Roosevelt
was increasingly drawn into
Grinnell's battles, including
the longstanding crusade to
keep Yellowstone as pristine
as possible.
It was a constant fight.
There were repeated attempts
in Congress to reduce
the park's size or open it up
to greater
commercial exploitation.
Roosevelt helped
defeat them all.
But despite those successes,
there was still no federal law
giving Yellowstone's
caretakers clear authority to
protect its wildlife,
including its dwindling herd
of wild buffalo.
On March 13, 1894,
two troopers out
on patrol in Yellowstone
heard shots in the distance
and hurried in that direction.
[Gunshot]
Soon they came across
several buffalo carcasses.
A man was hunched over one of
them, so busily skinning it
that he didn't realize the
troopers were there until one
of them was beside him
with a drawn gun.
The poacher was Edgar Howell,
and he had been methodically
killing as many buffalos as
he could, planning to haul out
their heads for sale to
a Montana taxidermist.
As luck would have it,
a reporter named Emerson Hough
on assignment for "Forest and
Stream," was also in the park
with a photographer to do an
article about Yellowstone
in the winter.
When the poacher bragged that
the worst punishment he could
receive for his crime was
expulsion from the park
and the loss of only 26
dollars' worth of equipment,
Hough realized he had stumbled
onto a great story and quickly
telegraphed it to Grinnell
in New York City.
Grinnell knew just what
to do with it.
SCHULLERY: Grinnell just
pulled out all the stops.
He ran the story in
"Forest and Stream."
He was in contact with
everybody he knew who might be
able to wake up, you know,
the sleeping giant,
the American public, and
make them care about this,
and he succeeded.
COYOTE: Within a week,
legislation was working its
way through Congress,
authorizing regulations that
would finally protect the
park, its geysers,
and its wildlife.
On May 7, 1894, less than two
months after Howell's capture,
President Grover Cleveland
signed the bill into law.
[Birds chirping]
SCHULLERY: George Bird
Grinnell and Theodore Roosevelt
and the other defenders of
Yellowstone were thinking
in ecosystem terms before
anybody was using the term.
They saw places like
Yellowstone as reservoirs.
They used the
term "reservoir."
It was a reservoir
for wildlife.
I think if the opportunity
presented by the capture
of Howell had been missed,
we would have lost the bison.
They were so close to gone.
MAN: Gentlemen, why in
heaven's name this haste?
You have time enough.
Why sacrifice the present to
the future, fancying that you
will be happier when your
fields teem with wealth
and your cities with people?
In Europe, we have cities
wealthier and more populous
than yours, and we
are not happy.
You dream of your posterity,
but your posterity will look
back to yours as the golden
age and envy those who first
burst into this silent,
splendid nature, who first
lifted up their axes upon
these tall trees and lined
these waters with
busy wharves.
Why, then, seek to complete,
in a few decades, what took
the other nations of the
world thousands of years?
Why, in your hurry to subdue
and utilize nature, squander
her splendid gifts?
You have opportunity such as
mankind has never had before
and may never have again.
Lord James Bryce.
MAN: The first duty of the
human race is to control
the earth it lives upon.
The first principle of
conservation is development,
the use of natural resources
now existing on this continent
for the benefit of the
people who live here now.
Gifford Pinchot.
COYOTE: Gifford Pinchot was
a graduate of Yale who had
studied forestry in Germany
and France and returned as
the first American to
declare himself
a professional forester.
He and John Muir had met in
1896 and in the beginning
enjoyed each other's company,
camping together on the rim
of the Grand Canyon.
But while the two men agreed
that America's forests were
being rapaciously destroyed,
they ultimately parted company
on the solution.
Muir considered
forests sacred.
He wanted them treated as
parks with logging, grazing,
and hunting prohibited.
Pinchot didn't agree.
He wanted forests protected,
too, but he believed the best
way to do it was to manage
their use, not leave them alone.
His favorite saying was
"the greatest good
"for the greatest number."
MAN AS JOHN MUIR: Much is
said on questions of this kind
about the greatest good
for the greatest number,
but the greatest number is too
often found to be number one.
It is never the greatest
number in the common meaning
of the term that makes the
greatest noise and stir
on questions mixed with money.
Complaints are made in
the name of poor settlers
and miners, while the wealthy
corporations are kept
carefully hidden
in the background.
Let right, commendable
industry be fostered, but as
to these Goths and Vandals
of the wilderness who are
spreading black death in the
fairest woods God ever made,
let the government
up and at 'em.
CRONON: We often tell
stories about the origins
of the American conservation
movement by setting John Muir
and Gifford Pinchot in
counterpoint with each other.
Often in those stories,
John Muir is the hero
and Gifford Pinchot
is the villain.
In fact, they represent,
I think, two sides of one coin.
Muir is the figure who
celebrates the sacred
in nature--the wildness,
the otherness of nature,
that which we need to protect
if we are not to contaminate
things that are nonhuman
with our own human agendas.
Pinchot, on the other hand,
is about a conservation that
celebrates sustainability.
It's about keeping the
roots of our material lives
in the natural world in such
a way that we don't destroy
nature as we use nature
for our own livelihood.
COYOTE: Congress and the
administration of President
Grover Cleveland sided with
Pinchot, who was appointed
the nation's chief forester.
National forests would
become part of the Department
of Agriculture, used and
managed like a crop,
not preserved like a temple.
But if Muir could not prevail
on the future of all national
forests, he tried to salvage
at least a partial victory by
protecting one forest as
a national park.
It was in western
Washington state within sight
of the cities of Seattle and
Tacoma, the ancient homeland
of nearly a dozen Indian
tribes, including the Cowlitz,
Nisqually, Puyallup,
and Yakima, who called it
Tahoma, the big mountain
where the waters begin.
White settlers called
it Mount Rainier.
MAN AS JOHN MUIR: Altogether,
this is the richest subalpine
garden I ever found,
a perfect floral elysium.
The icy dome needs not a man's
care, but unless the reserve
is guarded, the flower
bloom will soon be killed,
and nothing of the forest
will be left but black
stump monuments.
COYOTE: A broad coalition,
including the Sierra Club,
the National Geographic
Society, and the Northern
Pacific Railroad, worked hard
with Muir for more than 5
years, and on March 2, 1899,
Mount Rainier became the
nation's fifth national park.
MAN: When on the streets I
meet young girls and matrons
with their kindly faces
and see the egrets in their
bonnets and hats, I cannot
help feeling that these
daughters of Eve do not
know how these feathers
were obtained.
These plumes only grow while
the bird is rearing its young,
and I believe that if most of
the women who wear them knew
they were obtained by shooting
the mother on her nest,
they would be ashamed to
keep them, even in secret,
much less to display them
on the public streets.
John F. Lacey.
COYOTE: For centuries,
the nation's greatest breeding
ground for its most beautiful
plumed birds was southern
Florida, where the fresh
waters of Lake Okeechobee
drained slowly toward the Gulf
of Mexico, through cypress
swamps and mangrove forests
and the biggest saw grass marsh
in the world, the Everglades.
But by 1900, the long plumes
of the great white and snowy
egrets had become more
valuable per ounce than gold,
and nearly 95% of Florida's
shorebirds had been killed by
plume hunters.
More than 5 million birds a
year were perishing to satisfy
the demand of the latest
fashion trend--using bird
feathers to
decorate women's hats.
Strolling the streets of New
York for part of an afternoon,
one ornithologist counted 542
feathered hats, representing
40 different species.
Some hats included an
entire stuffed bird.
MAN AS GEORGE BIRD GRINNELL:
Fashion decrees feathers,
and feathers it is.
This condition of affairs must
be something of a shock to
the leaders of the Audubon
Society, who were sanguine
enough to believe that the
moral idea represented by
their movement would be enough
to influence society at large.
George Bird Grinnell.
COYOTE: The Audubon Society
had done its best to try to
persuade women not to buy such
hats, even promoted the sale
of featherless hats called
Audubonetts decorated
with ribbons.
It didn't work, and the
millenary industry, based
principally in New York City,
used its influence in Congress
to defeat a series of national
laws aimed at stopping
the slaughter.
Then an unlikely
champion stepped forward.
MAN AS JOHN F. LACEY:
We have a wireless telegraph,
a thornless cactus,
a seedless orange, and
a coreless apple.
Let us now have
a birdless hat.
John F. Lacey.
COYOTE: As the Republican
party began fracturing
at the start of the 20th
century into a progressive
wing and a group of die-hard
conservatives known as
Stand-Pat Republicans,
Representative John F. Lacey
of Oskaloosa, Iowa,
counted himself with those
opposed to change.
But when it came to defending
wildlife or saving America's
remaining unspoiled lands,
Lacey's definition
of conservative placed him not
only outside his fellow
Stand-Patters but
in the vanguard of even
the most progressive
politicians of the day.
MAN AS JOHN F. LACEY: The first
settlers found this continent
a storehouse of energy and
national wealth, but we have
not been content with
using these resources.
We have wasted them
as reckless prodigals.
For more than 300 years,
destruction was
called improvement.
Mankind must conserve the
resources of nature, or the
world will, at no distant day,
become as barren as
a sucked orange.
COYOTE: It had been Lacey,
working with George Bird
Grinnell and Theodore
Roosevelt, who pushed through
the bill that finally gave
government officials the tools
they needed to protect
America's last wild buffalo
herd in Yellowstone.
Now, after years of ceaseless
effort, he won passage
of another landmark, the Lacey
Bird and Game Act of 1900.
Soon, government agents were
confiscating huge shipments
of bird skins and feathers.
But the Lacey Act did not
put an end to plume hunting
entirely, especially in
the lawless Everglades.
5 years after the bill's
passage, a game warden was
murdered by poachers.
3 years after that,
another one was gunned down.
Some people began thinking
that the uniquely abundant
array of wildlife in southern
Florida would never be safe
unless the Everglades
itself was set aside, like
Yellowstone, as
a national park.
MAN AS JOHN F. LACEY: The
attempt to preserve and restore
some of the wildlife of America
is no longer looked upon
as a fad or idle sentiment.
We have given an awful
exhibition of slaughter
and destruction which may
serve as a warning to
all mankind.
Let us now give an example
of wise conservation of what
remains of the
gifts of nature.
COYOTE: As America moved into
a new century, a new word--
conservation--had crept into
the nation's vocabulary.
Now a new president would
turn the word into a movement.
MAN: Like all Americans,
I like big things--big
prairies, big forests and
mountains, big wheat fields,
railroads, and herds
of cattle, too.
Big factories, steamboats,
and everything else.
CRONON: I think it's hard to
exaggerate the significance
of Theodore Roosevelt
in the history
of American conservation.
He creates a presidency when
he arrives in the White House
that sets in motion most of
the conservation agendas that
will define the first half
of the 20th century.
MAN: The key to Teddy
Roosevelt's leadership was his
passion, his audacity,
the fact that he was
an inspiring public speaker
and enjoyed leading the country.
He was a person who turned
the country in a different
direction where conservation
was concerned.
COYOTE: In the spring of 1903,
Theodore Roosevelt once again
boarded a train headed west,
and on April 8, he stepped off
at the Northern Pacific
railroad terminal just outside
of Yellowstone National Park.
He was no longer the scrawny
and inexperienced Easterner
cowboys had laughed at
and called "four-eyes"
20 years earlier.
He was a national hero,
the leader of the Rough Riders
in the war with Spain,
a former governor
of New York state,
President William McKinley's
running mate in 1900,
and now, following McKinley's
assassination in 1901,
the youngest president
in United States history.
MAN: The president
unites in himself
powers and qualities
that rarely go together...
the qualities of a man of action
with those of a scholar
and writer...
the instincts
and accomplishments
of the best breeding and culture
with the broadest
democratic sympathies.
He is doubtless the most
vital man on the continent,
if not on the planet, today.
John Burroughs.
COYOTE: Not since Thomas
Jefferson a century earlier
had there been
an American president
with greater interest
in the natural world.
JENKINSON: Roosevelt began
his life as a naturalist.
He formed Theodore Roosevelt's
Natural History Museum
as a child, and he was
a taxidermist.
He would find snakes and mice
and other creatures
and sometimes store them
in the refrigerator,
the icebox of his family.
Several maids quit over this.
The house smelled of taxidermy.
He had formaldehyde everywhere.
This was a young boy
who was fascinated by
the idea of the museum
and nature,
but all of this is preliminary.
It wasn't until he went
out to Dakota in 1883
that Roosevelt really
started to understand
what was at stake in the debate
about the future of nature
in this country.
COYOTE: "When I hear about
the destruction of a species,"
he said, "I feel
just as if the works
"of some great writer
had perished."
JENKINSON: I think it can
be said that Roosevelt invented
the national wildlife
refuge system.
This was done
by executive order alone.
A national park
needs to be voted on
by a majority
in two houses of Congress.
Roosevelt said to his
attorney general Philander Knox,
"Is there anything
that would prevent me
"from naming Pelican Island
on the Indian River in Florida
"a national bird sanctuary?"
and Knox, the Attorney General,
said, "No, nothing."
And so Roosevelt said,
"I do declare it."
COYOTE: When Roosevelt
arrived in Yellowstone,
he was in the middle
of a national tour
unprecedented in its ambition.
14,000 grueling miles.
25 states.
150 towns and cities.
More than 200 speeches
in the space of 8 weeks.
From the day he left Washington,
he had been looking forward
to some time off in Yellowstone,
and immediately
upon his arrival,
he set off on horseback
with the Army's
acting park superintendent
as his host,
leaving the rest
of the presidential
entourage behind,
including his staff,
his Secret Service men,
his physician, and all
the reporters covering the trip.
"As far as the world at large
is concerned,"
his private secretary
told the press,
"The president will be lost."
Only John Burroughs,
the popular nature writer,
was allowed to come along.
The summer tourist season
was still two months away,
so Roosevelt had Yellowstone
essentially to himself.
He loved every minute of it.
He delighted in seeing
so many animals--
herds of mule deer
and whitetails
and pronghorn antelope,
flocks of bighorn sheep.
He watched an eagle swoop down
to try to capture
a yearling elk,
saw cougars feasting
on the carcasses of their prey,
spent 4 hours one afternoon
looking through
his field glasses,
trying to count all the elk
within sight,
ultimately estimating them
to number 3,000.
On Easter morning, the President
of the United States
insisted on leaving the campsite
entirely on his own.
He tramped 18 miles
over rough ground
in order to sneak up
to within 50 yards
of another elk herd,
sat down on a rock, and gazed
rapturously upon them
while he ate his lunch
of hardtack and sardines.
One morning,
President Roosevelt was shaving,
and he had lathered up his face
with shaving cream,
and he was shaving himself
in the wilderness
with a little mirror,
when somebody came in and said,
"There are bighorn sheep
out there
"and they're
coming down this cliff."
So, Roosevelt said, "By Godfrey,
I have to see that,"
and he jumps up with
half of his face clean-shaven
and the other half
full of lather
and runs out into nature to see
the bighorn sheep coming down
this nearly sheer cliff.
And Burroughs said, "What kind
of president is this?"
He's just an overgrown boy who's
so enthusiastic about nature
that it infects
everyone around him
with a new enthusiasm
for the natural world.
COYOTE: Roosevelt
was witnessing firsthand
the results of the wildlife
protection bill
he and George Bird Grinnell
and Congressman John Lacey
had worked so hard to pass.
The game animals were now
much more numerous,
he assured Burroughs,
than when he had last visited
the park 12 years earlier.
Still, the president was itching
to shoot something.
SCHULLERY: Roosevelt will always
baffle people who don't hunt
because he both loved animals
and loved hunting them,
and in Yellowstone,
what he really wanted to do
was shoot a mountain lion.
At the time, park managers
were killing predators.
It was something
that was going on anyway.
And so to Roosevelt's mind,
"Well, why not me?"
COYOTE: The president's
advisers thought
killing any animal
in a national park
would be bad politics
and quietly dissuaded him.
In all, Roosevelt spent
two weeks in Yellowstone,
including several days traveling
in a horse-drawn sleigh
to the park's interior,
still covered in some places
by up to 6 feet of snow.
He saw the Norris geyser basin
and Old Faithful
and skied to the rim
of the Grand Canyon
of the Yellowstone.
But these wonders held
only passing interest to him
compared to the park's wildlife.
In addition
to the larger animals,
he recorded sightings
of pine squirrels
and snowshoe hares
and scores of different birds,
including a pygmy owl,
the first he had ever seen.
"He responded with boyish glee,"
Burroughs wrote.
"I think the president
was as pleased
"as if we had bagged
some big game."
At one point,
Roosevelt sees a mouse
that he thinks
is new to science,
so he jumps off the sleigh
and grabs it with his hand
and kills it and then stuffs it.
MAN AS JOHN BURROUGHS:
While we all went fishing
in the afternoon,
the president skinned his mouse
and prepared the pelt
for Washington.
It was done as neatly
as a professed taxidermist
would have done it.
This was the only game
the president killed
in the park.
John Burroughs.
COYOTE: On April 24, at the end
of Roosevelt's visit,
the entire population of
the town of Gardiner, Montana,
gathered at the park's
north entrance
for a special ceremony.
A new arch to welcome visitors
to Yellowstone
was under construction,
and the president
had agreed to speak
at the laying
of the arch's cornerstone.
For the occasion,
Roosevelt reluctantly
changed out of his
camping clothes,
put on a business suit,
and rode through town
to the awaiting crowd.
He watched as the cornerstone
was carefully put into place,
then climbed to a rough platform
on the stonework
of the incomplete pillar
and began to speak.
MAN AS THEODORE ROOSEVELT:
The Yellowstone Park
is something absolutely unique
in the world,
so far as I know.
This park was created
and is now administered
for the benefit and enjoyment
of the people.
The scheme of its preservation
is noteworthy in its
essential democracy.
The only way that
the people as a whole
can secure to themselves
and their children
the enjoyment in perpetuity
of what the Yellowstone park
has to give
is by assuming ownership
in the name of the nation
and jealously safeguarding
and preserving
the scenery, the forests,
and the wild creatures.
JENKINSON: Roosevelt argued
that the parks
are a democratic experience.
That was his essential argument
about the national parks,
that the rich people
always have their playgrounds,
they know how
to amuse themselves,
and that America
as a classless society
or at least a society
that would like to be classless
needs to have places where
regular human beings can go
and stand side by side
with the rich and privileged
and enjoy the same experience
and not be made to feel
that they are somehow less.
And so his primary argument
was that the national parks
are a democratic experiment
in nature.
COYOTE: Before he got
back on the train
to resume his trip,
Roosevelt also
deliberately quoted
from the act of Congress
that had made Yellowstone
the world's first
national park--
"for the benefit and enjoyment
of the people."
Later, when the arch
was finally completed,
that phrase would be permanently
carved into its mantle
so that everyone
who entered Yellowstone
would be reminded of why
the park was there
and for whom.
JOHNSON: I remember the first
time I arrived in Yellowstone,
I got off the bus right outside
the north entrance,
where there's that wonderful
stone arch that says
"For the benefit and enjoyment
of the people."
It doesn't say,
"For the benefit and enjoyment
"of some of the people,
or a few of the people."
It says, "All of the people,"
and for me,
that meant democracy,
that meant I was welcome,
and I stepped outside,
and as I was
stepping down onto the ground,
there was bison, a 2,000-pound
animal walking by,
and there was
no one else around.
The bison was just strolling by.
And I looked up at the driver
and I said,
"Does this happen all the time?"
and he looked at me and said,
"All the time."
And I said to myself,
"I've arrived,"
and I can't imagine being
in any other place,
and to be honest with you,
once I stepped off that bus,
I never got back on.
[Whistle blows]
COYOTE: Two weeks
after leaving Yellowstone,
Roosevelt's whirlwind tour
brought him
to Arizona's Grand Canyon
for a brief stop on the way
from New Mexico
to southern California.
Roosevelt had never before seen
the Grand Canyon,
and he was overwhelmed by
the vista from the south rim.
He longed to spend
more time there,
but his schedule permitted
only this quick visit
and a few remarks to the crowd
that had gathered to greet him.
MAN AS THEODORE ROOSEVELT: I
want to ask you to do one thing
in connection with it
in your own interest and in
the interest of the country.
Keep this great wonder of nature
as it now is.
Leave it as it is.
You cannot improve it.
The ages have been at work on it
and man can only mar it.
What you can do is to keep it
for your children,
your children's children,
and for all who come after you
as one of the great sights
which every American,
if he can travel at all,
should see.
JENKINSON: The great statement
in this speech is
"Leave it as it is.
"The ages have been
at work on it
"and man can only mar it."
Nothing has ever been said
about the national parks
as fine as that.
The idea for Roosevelt
was that humans have an itch
to change things...
but the beauty
of the Grand Canyon
is when you look at it
and you see nothing
that humans have constructed.
It's a magnificent thing
that he said,
and if that were the one
wilderness statement
of American life,
I believe
it's greater than Thoreau.
I believe that it's
greater than John Muir.
"Leave it as it is.
The ages have been at work on it
"and man can only mar it"
should be the motto in front
of every national park
in the country.
And if you think
that this was said
by a man on a 14,000-mile trip
in which he gave 262 speeches
more or less
off the top of his head
on seeing the Grand Canyon
for the first time,
you realize what
presidential greatness can be.
COYOTE: Then Roosevelt
was gone...
and by the next day, he was
whistle-stopping his way
through California,
giving 2 to 3 speeches a day,
attending banquets and dinners
in his honor,
presiding at dedications
and groundbreakings,
setting the frenetic pace
that had become his hallmark.
[Bird cawing]
MAN AS JOHN MUIR:
Nothing can be done well
at a speed of 40 miles a day.
Far more time should be taken.
Walk away quietly
in any direction
and taste the freedom
of the mountaineer.
Climb the mountains
and get their good tidings.
Nature's peace
will flow into you
as sunshine flows into trees.
The winds will blow their own
freshness into you
and the storms their energy
while cares will drop off
like autumn leaves.
COYOTE: By 1903,
John Muir was 65
and more famous than ever.
Mountain peaks and canyons,
campsites and glaciers
now bore his name.
Magazine editors besieged him
with requests for articles.
The Sierra Club he had founded
was growing steadily,
and the hikes he personally led
into the mountains
were always the club's
most heavily attended.
People loved to hear him preach
his deeply held gospel
that salvation could be found
through immersion
in the natural world.
WOMAN: John Muir was there,
mounted on the horse
which he rode now and then,
when no woman would accept
the loan of it.
He was rapt, entranced.
He threw up his arms
in a grand gesture.
"This is the morning
of creation," he cried.
"The whole thing
is beginning now."
"The mountains
are singing together."
Harriet Monroe.
COYOTE: For nearly a decade now,
he had been struggling to have
the Yosemite Valley
given back to
the federal government
and made part of the larger
Yosemite National Park.
But nothing he seemed
to say or do
had proven successful.
Things remained at a standstill
in the spring of 1903,
as Muir prepared to leave his
home in Martinez, California,
and embark on a trip to Europe
and Asia with some friends.
Suddenly, his plans changed.
MAN AS JOHN MUIR: An influential
man from Washington
wants to make a trip
into the Sierra with me,
and I might be able to do some
forest good,
in freely talking
around the campfire.
COYOTE: It was the president,
still working his way up
through California,
asking Muir to accompany him
during a visit to Yosemite.
"I do not want
anyone with me but you,"
Roosevelt had written.
"I want to drop
politics absolutely
"and just be out in the open
with you."
Muir realized this was
the opportunity of a lifetime.
He purchased a brand-new
woolen suit for the occasion
and hurried to join
the presidential entourage.
On May 15, they set off for
the Mariposa Grove of big trees
in a flurry of activity.
A long caravan of wagons filled
with staff and dignitaries,
a detachment
of 30 buffalo soldiers
riding along as escorts.
Muir soon found himself seated
in the president's coach
along with the governor
of California,
the Secretary of the Navy,
the Surgeon General,
two college presidents,
and Roosevelt's
personal secretary.
It was hardly the trip
he had been promised,
but Muir tried his best
to squeeze in words
to the president and governor
about the issue of making
all of Yosemite a national park.
In the grove of mighty sequoias,
the president's group paused,
as all tourists did,
for a snapshot at the famous
Wawona tunnel tree,
and later, they posed
for an official photograph,
lined up along the base
of the Grizzly Giant,
the oldest and most famous
sequoia in Yosemite,
estimated to be 2,700 years old
and boasting a single branch
that was 6 1/2 feet in diameter.
Then the troops, the phalanx
of reporters and photographers,
and virtually all
of the official party
headed back to the Wawona Hotel,
where a series of receptions
and a grand dinner
were scheduled
in the president's honor
that evening.
None of them knew that Roosevelt
had no intention of attending.
Instead, he remained behind
with only John Muir
and a few park employees,
who started preparing a camp
at the base
of one of the sequoias,
part of a secret plan
Roosevelt had hatched
to allow him time
alone with the trees
and the man who
considered them sacred.
They built a fire
and sat around it,
eating a simple supper, talking
as twilight enveloped them,
getting to know one another
in the glow of the blaze.
MAN AS THEODORE ROOSEVELT:
The night was clear,
and in the darkening aisles
of the great sequoia grove,
the majestic trunks,
beautiful in color and symmetry,
rose around us like the pillars
of a mightier cathedral
than ever was conceived even by
the fervor of the Middle Ages.
Hermit thrushes sang beautifully
in the evening.
JENKINSON: And Muir said,
"I fell in love with this
Theodore Roosevelt."
I mean, he actually
used those words.
"You can't resist this man.
I fell in love with him."
Roosevelt, interestingly enough,
came back and complained
a little bit about Muir
and said, "He doesn't know
his bird songs."
Roosevelt's an ornithologist.
He knows everything there is
to know about birds.
But Muir also got one off
on Roosevelt.
He said to him, "Mr. President,
"when are you going to get over
this infantile need you have
"to kill animals?"
Roosevelt would not have taken
that from any other human being.
MAN AS JOHN MUIR: I had a
perfectly glorious time
with the president
and the mountains.
I never before
had a more interesting,
hearty, and manly companion.
I stuffed him pretty well
regarding the timber thieves
and other spoilers
of the forest.
COYOTE: Long after sundown,
with no tent and only
a pile of army blankets,
the two men finally
went to sleep.
[Owl hooting]
[Horse whinnying]
COYOTE: The next morning
at 6:30,
they saddled up for the long
ride to Yosemite Valley,
with the guide under
strict orders from the president
to avoid at all costs
the Wawona Hotel
and the delegation of officials
he had jilted the night before.
In the high country
near Glacier Point,
with its spectacular panorama
of the valley
and its waterfalls
arrayed at their feet,
they stopped and once more
made camp
at a spot their guide--
Charlie Leidig--had picked out.
MAN AS CHARLIE LEIDIG: Around
the campfire, Roosevelt and Muir
talked far into the night
regarding Muir's glacial theory
of the formation
of Yosemite Valley.
They also talked a great deal
about the protection
of forests in general
and Yosemite in particular.
I heard them discussing
the setting aside
of other areas in the United
States for park purposes.
There was some difficulty
in their campfire conversation
because both men wanted
to do the talking.
COYOTE: They awoke
the next morning,
covered by a light snow that
had fallen in the high country
during the night.
Rather than
feeling inconvenienced,
the president couldn't
have been more delighted.
"We slept in a snowstorm
last night,"
he exclaimed to the crowds
that had been patiently waiting
for him on the valley floor.
"This," he said, "has been
the grandest day of my life."
After camping one more night
alone with Muir,
the president was
picked up and escorted
back to the train station
for the resumption
of his cross-country tour.
And when he spoke at
the state capital in Sacramento
a day later,
Roosevelt's words sounded
as if they could have come
from the lips of John Muir.
MAN AS THEODORE ROOSEVELT:
Lying out at night under those
sequoias was lying in a temple
built by no hand of man.
A temple grander than
any human architect
could by any possibility build,
and I hope for the preservation
of the groves of giant trees
simply because it would be
a shame to our civilization
to let them disappear.
They are monuments
in themselves.
I want them preserved.
We are not building
this country of ours for a day.
It is to last through the ages.
COYOTE: Within 3 years,
the California legislature
and United States Congress
approved the transfer
of the Yosemite Valley
and Mariposa big trees
back to the federal government.
MAN AS JOHN MUIR: I am now
an experienced lobbyist.
My political education
is complete.
Have attended the legislature,
made speeches,
explained, exhorted,
persuaded every mother's son
of the legislators,
newspaper reporters,
and everybody else
who would listen to me.
And now that
the fight is finished
and my education as a politician
and lobbyist is finished,
I am almost finished myself.
COYOTE: Yosemite National Park
now encompassed
almost everything
Muir had been fighting for.
"Sound the timbrel,"
he wrote a friend,
"and let every Yosemite
tree and stream rejoice."
JOHNSON: I remember one
day I was walking
in the Cook's Meadow,
which is the meadow in the
central part of Yosemite Valley,
and there was a woman there,
and she was just looking
up and around her
and she just kept saying,
"Oh. Oh, my.
"Oh, my."
I looked at her, I said,
"Ma'am, are you all right?"
She said, "Yes, I'm just fine.
I just--oh."
I didn't have to talk
to her about
the transcendent experience.
She was having one, and it
wasn't a transcendent experience
because it was a national park.
It was transcendent because
it was Yosemite Valley.
But because it had become
a national park,
she could have
that transcendent experience.
And that's commonplace
in Yosemite.
And where else can you get
an experience like that?
[Bird cawing]
WOMAN: In other parts
of the world,
there are certain areas
that are preserved
because some rich nobleman
out of the goodness of his heart
decided to decree it.
But in the United States,
you don't have to be
dependent on some rich guy
being generous to you.
To me that's what
national parks mean.
It's a symbol of democracy,
democracy when it works well.
At its best.
COYOTE: Back in 1870,
a 15-year-old boy in Kansas
was idly reading the newspaper
that had been used
to wrap his lunch.
He came across an article
about a mysterious sunken lake
in Oregon
and he vowed to visit it
one day.
It would take
William Gladstone Steel
15 years to get there.
MAN AS WILLIAM STEEL:
Imagine a vast mountain,
6 by 7 miles through,
at an elevation of 8,000 feet
with the top removed
and the inside hollowed out,
then filled with the clearest
water in the world,
and you have
a perfect representation
of Crater Lake.
COYOTE: When a volcanic eruption
witnessed by the ancestors
of the Klamath Indians
blew the top off a mountain peak
in the Cascades 7,700 years ago,
the hole that was left
began slowly filling
with each year's rainfall
and snowmelt.
The result was Crater Lake--
at 1,942 feet, the deepest lake
in America.
Because it is filled
almost entirely by snowfall,
the lake is also
the world's clearest.
An 8-inch disc lowered
into its sky-blue waters
is still visible 142 feet
below the surface.
William Steel resolved that
it should be protected forever,
just like Yellowstone
and the other parks.
That quest took him
another 17 years
of tireless promotion
and lobbying
before he finally succeeded
in 1902,
when Crater Lake
became the nation's
sixth national park.
And it had all happened
because of this accidental
lunchtime reading
32 years earlier.
DUNCAN: The parks, they're
the greatest spots on earth,
wonderful natural places,
but the story of national parks
really isn't a story
about the place.
It's--it's the story of people
who fell in love
with those places,
people who became
so devoted to them
that they wanted to do anything
they could to save them.
SMITH: Richard Wetherill.
He's broadening out
from Mesa Verde.
He wants to make people aware
that we have such a treasure,
such a heritage here,
and yet here's this cowboy.
A cowboy, and we all know
what cowboys are.
We read in our dime novels.
They can't be doing
anything scholarly.
COYOTE: Despite his lack
of formal education,
Richard Wetherill wanted to be
taken seriously
as an archaeologist.
He had left Mesa Verde
and began scouring the Southwest
in search of other ruins.
His journey took him from
Colorado to Utah and Arizona
and finally to New Mexico,
to a place called Chaco Canyon.
another eerily silent
set of ruins
left behind
by the ancient Puebloans.
With walls
of remarkable workmanship,
some rising 5 stories,
Pueblo Bonito, the biggest ruin,
contained remnants
of an enclosed plaza,
35 circular kivas,
more than 2 acres
honeycombed by 650 rooms,
connected by small
passageways and doors.
The religious and cultural hub
of the civilization
that had dominated
the surrounding region
between 850 A.D. and 1200 A.D.
By itself, Pueblo Bonito
was several times larger
than anything at Mesa Verde
and it sat in the midst
of an array
of nearly a dozen other
significant ruins.
Wetherill moved there
with his wife Marietta,
filed a homestead claim,
and hired nearly 100 Navajos
to help with the excavations.
Though Wetherill tried
to carry on his work
as carefully and scientifically
as possible,
professional archaeologists
still dismissed him
as a pothunter.
And as the relics
he was unearthing
reached eastern museums,
50,000 pieces of turquoise,
10,000 pieces of pottery,
5,000 stone implements,
and much more,
they clamored for the government
to do something to stop him.
SMITH: Richard Wetherill
was very careful
identifying everything he found.
He was ahead of
the professional archaeologists,
which is an oxymoron
at that time,
but he was ahead of them,
and I think they were
jealous of him.
There's a snobbishness.
Educated Easterners
can't believe
that a western cowboy could
possibly be doing these things.
COYOTE: For his part,
Wetherill said,
he would gladly turn over
any portions of Chaco Canyon
if the federal government
would simply do something
to protect them.
But the criticism
of Wetherill's work
would not go away.
[Bird cawing]
COYOTE: Meanwhile,
back at Mesa Verde,
the ruins Wetherill had first
discovered were in danger.
Thieves, pot hunters,
and tourists
were flocking to the site,
looting the artifacts,
damaging the ancient structures,
sometimes even setting off
sticks of dynamite
simply to frighten away
the rattlesnakes.
Now a new group
had taken up the cause
of protecting its treasures.
WOMAN: Mesa Verde
seems to be set apart
for a park,
and to make and keep it as such
is the aim of the Colorado
Cliff Dwellings Association
of Women.
Virginia McClurg.
COYOTE: Virginia McClurg
was a well-known lecturer
with a seemingly
boundless determination
to leave her mark on the world.
She gathered a group of women
into the Colorado
Cliff Dwellings Association,
organized petitions,
wrote personal letters
to the president,
held rummage sales,
and solicited
10-cent contributions
from other women's groups
across the country.
And it was working.
Support for protecting
Mesa Verde
had become a national cause.
But just when Congress
seemed ready to act,
it became clear
to those around her
that Virginia McClurg
had a different vision
of how Mesa Verde
should be preserved.
WOMAN AS VIRGINIA McCLURG:
I do not see why
this small and compact tract
in the proposed park
should not be under
the protective care
of a body of 125 women
with hereditary membership
who know more about the matter
and care about the matter
than anyone else.
Virginia became
so engrossed in it
that it suddenly was not
our park as a nation,
it was her park.
COYOTE: Twice McClurg
even negotiated leases
between her group
and the Ute Indians
only to have the federal
government remind her
that private citizens
cannot make treaties.
The uproar she created
threatened to derail
the bill in Congress
at the very moment it seemed
headed for passage.
Even some of her closest allies
now suspected
that Virginia McClurg
had lost sight of the real goal.
Lucy Peabody, the association's
vice regent,
had preferred to get results
rather than grab headlines.
She believed that
only as a national park
could Mesa Verde be properly
saved for future generations,
and now felt compelled to resign
from the association.
With her went
many other members,
including some of the group's
most nationally prominent women.
McClurg, once the darling
of the press,
found herself disparaged
in newspaper editorials.
SMITH: There was a sadness
in all this.
At the moment of your greatest
achievement, you lose it.
I--I think it's
a normal reaction.
This becomes
so possessive with her
that to have it within
your grasp, right there,
and it's gone.
COYOTE: On June 29, 1906,
President Roosevelt
signed the law
creating Mesa Verde
National Park,
the first of its kind,
meant to celebrate
not majestic natural scenery
but a prehistoric culture
and its people.
With Mesa Verde protected,
anger over
Richard Wetherill's excavations
at Chaco Canyon in New Mexico
boiled over
and set in motion events
that would change the course
of park history.
SMITH: The bill for Mesa Verde
was just for Mesa Verde,
but what about the other ruins?
There's sites all over
the Southwest,
and the same thing's
happening there.
COYOTE: Once more,
Representative John F. Lacey
came to the rescue of places
nowhere near and nothing like
his native Iowa.
He sponsored a new bill to make
any unauthorized disturbance
of any prehistoric ruin
a federal crime.
The act for the preservation
of American antiquities
also granted the president
of the United States
an extraordinary power:
the exclusive authority without
any Congressional approval
to set aside places
that would be called
not national parks
but national monuments.
MAN: John F. Lacey
gave the president
the greatest power a president
could ever have
for the preservation of nature,
which allowed the president
to do
something as simple
as pick up a pen
and declare an area
of the public domain
a national monument,
and since Teddy Roosevelt
happened to be
the president at the time,
was that a gift or what?
Bully. Delighted.
Teddy Roosevelt
picked up that pen
and started creating
national monuments
and the country would
never be the same again.
COYOTE: Roosevelt quickly
put his new powers to use.
He proclaimed the first
national monument,
a unique mass of grooved rock
sacred to several Indian tribes
rising nearly 900 feet above
the plains of eastern Wyoming.
It was called Devil's Tower.
Then he named El Morro
National Monument in New Mexico,
a rock abutment bearing
prehistoric Indian petroglyphs
as well as the inscriptions
of early Spanish expeditions
that had come north from Mexico
300 years earlier
and founded a colony 15 years
before the Pilgrims
landed at Plymouth Rock.
And on March 11, 1907,
he did exactly what
Richard Wetherill had wanted
and created Chaco Canyon
National Monument.
Roosevelt would also
use the antiquities act
to protect an endangered grove
of coastal redwoods
north of San Francisco
named in honor of the man who
had first introduced Roosevelt
to the giant trees--
Muir Woods.
MAN AS JOHN MUIR: The man of
science, the naturalist,
too often loses sight
of the essential oneness
of all living beings
in seeking to classify
them in kingdoms,
orders, species, etc.
While the eye of the poet,
the seer,
never closes on the kinship
of all God's creatures.
And his heart
ever beats in sympathy
with great and small alike
as Earth-borne companions
and fellow mortals
equally dependent on Heaven's
eternal love.
COYOTE: In 1905, John Muir's
life had been beset by sorrow.
His devoted life Louie
died of lung cancer
and he buried her
next to her parents
near an orchard on their farm.
President Roosevelt,
who had lost his first wife
as a young man,
and then found solace
in the open spaces of the west,
sent his personal condolences.
"Get out among the mountains
and trees, friend," he wrote.
"They will do more for you than
either man or woman could."
But the aging mountaineer
went instead
to the deserts of Arizona,
where it was hoped
his daughter Helen
might recover from pneumonia.
In his grief, he began exploring
the surrounding area
and discovered that in fact
he was, once again,
in a majestic forest,
only this one was
200 million years old
and all of the trees
had long ago fossilized
into solid rock.
It was the petrified forest.
EHRLICH: I think parks represent
the wildness inside us.
They're the place
where we can be lonely,
where we can
experience solitude.
They're a place we go to
as refuge, as sanctuary.
It's a place we go out to
to come back in.
It's the only place perhaps left
in many people's lives
where that's possible.
COYOTE: Soon, Muir was
himself again,
sometimes taking total strangers
on long walks
through the tumbled and broken
stone trees.
In what he now called
"these enchanted
carboniferous forests,"
he loved nothing more
than to sit
near the trunk
of a petrified tree
and inspect it minutely
with a magnifying glass.
But even this forest
was endangered.
Scavengers used dynamite
to blow up large logs
in hopes of finding
amethyst crystals inside them.
Boxcar loads of petrified wood
were being shipped east
to be made into tabletops
and mantelpieces.
An enormous stone crusher
was being constructed
to pulverize the logs for use
as industrial abrasives.
For years, John F. Lacey had
been trying to protect the area
by making it a national park.
Congress would not go along.
But John Muir knew somebody
who now could save
his enchanted forest
with a stroke of his pen.
President Roosevelt invoked
the antiquities act again,
and Petrified Forest
National Monument was created.
MAN AS THEODORE ROOSEVELT:
There is nothing more practical
than the preservation
of beauty,
of anything
that appeals to the higher
emotions of mankind.
I believe we are past
the stage of national existence
when we could
look on complacently
at the individual
who skinned the land
and was content for the sake
of 3 years' profit for himself
to leave a desert
for the children of those
who were to inherit the soil.
JENKINSON: If government
doesn't protect
the weakest elements of humanity
and the weakest elements
of nature...
the whole game is lost.
That was
an incredible breakthrough
for a man who grew up
in a profoundly
Republican household
in an age of J.P. Morgan
and John Rockefeller.
There's a paradox at the very
center of American life.
We are meant to be
the most materially happy,
wealthiest, most privileged
people who ever lived on Earth.
That's one version
of the American dream.
We are also Thoreau's Americans
and Jefferson's Americans,
and Roosevelt's
Grand Canyon Americans.
We want that, and somehow
we've gotten it into our heads
that we can have both,
and maybe we can.
But Roosevelt understood
that we can only have both
if we severely restrain
our acquisitive energies
for some parts
of this continent.
That's the key.
UDALL: We used to talk
about Teddy Roosevelt
having distance in his eyes...
and that's what's important,
is to have this
strong, powerful
part of our heritage vivid
so that people can understand it
and appreciate it.
COYOTE: Before his presidency
was over,
he would create
5 new national parks,
51 federal bird sanctuaries,
4 national game refuges,
18 national monuments,
and more than 100 million acres
worth of national forests.
Now Roosevelt wanted one more
national park added to his list,
the place he had urged
the citizens of Arizona
to leave as it is--
the grandest canyon on Earth.
Developers were already
erecting buildings,
miners were filing claims,
and ranchers were grazing cattle
all along the south rim.
But even Theodore Roosevelt
could not persuade Congress
to act.
Local sentiment
and vested interests
were just too powerful.
The president looked
for some way, any way
to prevent the canyon
from becoming
another commercialized
Niagara Falls.
He found his solution
in the antiquities act.
CRONON: It was written
basically to try to prevent
the destruction of Indian
archaeological sites
in the American southwest,
the idea being that
there were people going in
and robbing these graves,
and that that
needed to be stopped.
And so a law is written
that says the president
can very quickly set aside
a tract of land
as a national monument,
and that's a fairly
narrow purpose.
But there were no
restrictions in the law,
and Teddy Roosevelt
quite quickly realized
that you could set aside land
for reasons
other than archaeology,
and the great beneficiary
of that law would be
the Grand Canyon.
COYOTE: The wording
of the antiquities act
referred to protection
of so-called
"objects of historic
and scientific interest,"
and though it had contemplated
only small-sized parcels,
up to then, no more than
5,000 acres,
it did not absolutely restrict
the number of acres a president
could set aside.
On January 11, 1908,
declaring the Grand Canyon
"an object of unusual
scientific interest,
"being the greatest
eroded canyon
"within the United States,"
Roosevelt set aside
806,400 acres
as a national monument.
It would not enjoy
the same protections
as a national park,
but it was a step
in the right direction.
Politicians in Arizona
were outraged
and threatened to challenge
Roosevelt in court.
Members of Congress complained
that the president
had overstepped his authority.
He ignored them all.
UDALL: A lot of Westerners,
powerful Westerners,
Congressmen, senators,
were opposed and critical...
and that was part
of Teddy Roosevelt's power,
that he could overwhelm
the wishes of local people
and dared to do it.
JENKINSON: Well,
there was furor.
There is always furor
when these things happen.
Short-term.
But Roosevelt understood
that short-term
controversy over nature
leads to long-term benefit.
Roosevelt's view was that
an intact environment
is infinitely more valuable
spiritually and economically
than an extracted one.
UDALL: But history
always vindicates,
always vindicates what they did.
There's not a single person
in Arizona today
who would say the Grand Canyon
was a mistake.
MAN AS JOHN MUIR:
The very first reservation
that ever was made
in this world,
the garden of Eden,
contained only one tree.
The smallest reservation
that ever was made.
Yet no sooner was it made
than it was attacked
by everybody in the world--
the devil, one woman,
and one man.
This has been the history
of every reservation
that has been made
since that time,
that is, as soon as
a reservation is once created,
then the thieves and the devil
and his relations
come forward to attack it.
DUNCAN: He said,
"Nothing dollarable is safe"...
and it's like this insight
into human beings,
but particularly Americans.
He understood
this relentless grasp
of American commerce.
It wants to reach
into everything.
And he realized
that if a dollar value
could be attached to,
in his mind, a sacred place,
it was vulnerable.
COYOTE: Since the start
of the 20th century,
the city of San Francisco
had been looking
for a better supply of water
to fuel its growth,
and it had set its sights
on the Tuolumne River
and the Hetch Hetchy Valley
as the perfect place for a dam
and reservoir,
a narrow valley
remote enough to assure
that the waters trapped
from the yearly Sierra runoff
would stay pure.
The fact that it was
within the boundaries
of Yosemite National Park
only added to its
attractiveness to city planners.
No competing claims
to water rights existed.
The only land owner to deal with
was the federal government.
Damming and flooding
Hetch Hetchy
would be cheaper and easier
than finding alternative sites.
MAN AS JOHN MUIR: That
anyone would try to destroy
such a place seems incredible,
but sad experience shows
that there are people
good enough and bad enough
for anything.
COYOTE: To John Muir,
allowing a dam
in any national park
would betray the very purpose
of parks,
and even worse in his eyes,
set a dangerous precedent
for the future.
Hetch Hetchy was among his
favorite places in Yosemite.
He called it
"one of nature's rarest
"and most precious
mountain temples."
With its own majestic waterfalls
and massive granite faces,
it had all the beauty of
the more famous Yosemite Valley
20 miles to the south, he said,
without the clutter
of tourist hotels.
When he had helped
draw the boundary lines
for the national park
back in 1890,
he had deliberately included
Hetch Hetchy.
MAN AS JOHN MUIR:
These temple destroyers,
devotees of
ravaging commercialism,
seem to have a perfect contempt
for nature,
and instead of
lifting their eyes
to the god of the mountains,
lift them
to the almighty dollar.
Dam Hetch Hetchy.
As well, dam for water-tanks
the people's cathedrals
and churches,
for no holier temple
has ever been consecrated
by the heart of man.
COYOTE: At first,
Muir's view had prevailed.
Theodore Roosevelt's
interior secretary
turned down San Francisco's
application 3 different times.
Then on April 18, 1906,
a tremendous earthquake
had shaken San Francisco,
bringing down
hundreds of buildings
and igniting fires
that consumed most of the city,
killing thousands.
With San Francisco
reduced to ashes,
politicians redoubled
their efforts
for a reservoir at Hetch Hetchy,
claiming falsely
that its water supply
could have prevented
the destruction.
In a referendum,
San Franciscans voted 7-1
in favor of the dam.
The city's mayor
launched a campaign
attacking Muir's character
for trying to obstruct
the project.
Even Muir's own Sierra Club
split over the issue,
with some prominent members
advocating the dam.
MAN: They loved Yosemite,
but they loved Yosemite
in a kind of additive way.
It wasn't at the core of their
understanding of America.
And for them in San Francisco,
the city came first.
COYOTE: Meanwhile, an old
adversary of Muir's
stepped forward
on the city's behalf--
Gifford Pinchot.
As the nation's top forester
and President Roosevelt's
trusted adviser,
Pinchot had become
one of the most powerful
men in Washington.
At his urging,
Roosevelt had reserved
millions of acres
of western land
as national forests
in the face
of Congressional opposition.
Pinchot steadfastly believed
that conservation meant
wise use of nature,
not preserving it
for its own sake,
and he had never been
a wholehearted supporter
of national parks,
let alone John Muir's
unbending vision
of protecting
and expanding them.
When a new interior secretary
joined the administration,
Pinchot began lobbying him
in support of the dam.
In response, Muir once again
took his case
to the man with whom
he had shared
3 magical nights in the park
back in 1903--
the outdoorsman he considered
a friend and kindred spirit.
MAN AS JOHN MUIR: April 21,
1908. Dear Mr. President,
a few promoters
of the present scheme
all show forth
a proud set of confidence
that comes from
a good, sound, substantial
irrefragable ignorance.
Hetch Hetchy is one of the most
sublime and beautiful
and important features
of the park,
and to dam and submerge it
would be hardly
less destructive and deplorable
than would be the damming
of Yosemite itself.
Faithfully and devotedly yours,
John Muir.
MAN AS THEODORE ROOSEVELT:
My dear Mr. Muir,
Pinchot is rather favorable
to the Hetch Hetchy plan.
I have sent him your letter
with a request
for a report on it.
I will do everything in my power
to protect not only
the Yosemite,
which we have already protected,
but other similar great natural
beauties of this country.
But you must remember
that it is out of the question
permanently to protect them,
unless we have a certain degree
of friendliness toward them
on the part of the people
of the state
in which they are situated.
CRONON: What makes the conflict
between Muir and Pinchot
so bitter, so personal
is that 2 really wonderful
visions of the human good,
both of which
are worth celebrating,
are on a collision course,
and that collision course meets
in Hetch Hetchy Valley
in Yosemite National Park.
For one man, Muir,
that valley and that park
are a cathedral,
and anything that might
desecrate that cathedral
is blasphemy.
It is a--it is a sacrilege
against God.
For the other man, Pinchot,
these are resources that serve
the common good.
These are resources
for a democracy.
COYOTE: But Pinchot
was in Washington
and Muir was in California.
Pinchot's view prevailed.
Pending Congressional approval,
the interior secretary granted
San Francisco's application,
calling it "the greatest benefit
"to the greatest
number of people."
President Roosevelt did nothing
to stop it.
Muir was devastated.
But the fight was not over.
A year later, with Roosevelt
out of the White House,
the new president,
William Howard Taft,
came to California on his own
tour of Yosemite,
and to the dismay of
San Francisco's politicians,
chose Muir as his guide.
Before the visit was over,
Taft decided to oppose the dam.
By 1913, however,
yet another president
had taken office--
Woodrow Wilson, who chose
as his secretary of the interior
Franklin K. Lane, the former
city attorney for San Francisco.
Lane wasted no time getting
the project back on track.
Muir was now 75, and the long
battle over Hetch Hetchy
had taken its toll.
Ten years earlier,
he had anticipated
completing 20 books
in his old age.
Because of what he called
"this everlasting
"Hetch Hetchy business,"
he had managed to finish only 2.
"I wonder,"
he wrote his daughter,
"if leaves feel lonely when they
see their neighbors falling."
Still, he soldiered on,
speaking, writing,
urging anyone who would listen
not to flood
the exquisite valley.
"I still think we can win,"
Muir said
in November of 1913, adding,
"anyhow, I'll be relieved
when it's settled,
"for it's killing me."
3 weeks later, the bill
approving the dam
cleared its final hurdle
in Congress.
President Wilson
quickly signed it into law.
MAN: It was sorrowful indeed
to see him sitting
in his cobwebbed study
in his lonely house
with the full force
of his defeat upon him
after the struggle of a lifetime
in the service of Hetch Hetchy.
I could not but think that
if Congress, the president,
and even the San Francisco
contingent could have seen him,
they would certainly
have been willing
to have delayed any action
until the old man had gone away.
And I fear that is
going to be very soon...
as he appeared to me
to be breaking very fast.
Robert Marshall.
COYOTE: Exhausted and frail,
Muir forced himself
to finish a book
on his travels in Alaska.
He built new bookcases
in the big, empty house
he had once shared
with his wife Louie
and their 2 children.
MAN AS JOHN MUIR:
The battle for conservation
will go on endlessly.
It is part
of the universal warfare
between right and wrong.
Fortunately, wrong cannot last.
Soon or late, it must
fall back home to Hades,
while some compensating good
must surely follow.
They will see
what I meant in time.
There must be places
for human beings
to satisfy their souls--
food and drink is not all.
There is the spiritual.
In some, it is only
a germ, of course.
But the germ will grow.
COYOTE: In December of 1914,
he came down with pneumonia.
On Christmas Eve, John Muir,
the wilderness prophet
who had struggled so hard
to get his adopted country
to experience
the blessings of nature, died.
POPE: I think when John Muir
walked into Yosemite,
a century-long
conversation began...
and it was a conversation about
the nature of America
and about whether
we were going to remain
what Lincoln called
"the last best hope of Earth"
or whether we were simply
going to become another Europe.
And John Muir's
encounter with Yosemite--
remember, he was a European.
He came from this
narrow Scots background.
He was not an American.
And he encountered Yosemite
and he imagined what America
could be.
And for a century,
we've fought about
whether we liked
his vision or not.
MAN: I like what he said
on one occasion
where he essentially said,
"the enemies of wildness
"are invincible,
and they are everywhere,
"but the fight must go on...
"and for every acre
that you gain,
"10,000 trees and flowers
and all the other forest people
"and the usual
unborn generations
"will rise up
and call you blessed."
COYOTE: 4 years
after Muir's death,
work on the dam he had opposed
with all his strength began,
and the Hetch Hetchy valley,
whose tranquil meadows he had
compared to a landscape garden
and a mountain temple
would slowly be entombed under
hundreds of feet of water.
But Muir's fight had struck
a chord in many Americans,
who now wondered
if a lovely valley
in Yosemite National Park
could be turned
into a reservoir,
were any national parks safe?
CRONON: John Muir lost the fight
over Hetch Hetchy
and the dam was built,
and people who live
in San Francisco today
drink the water of Hetch Hetchy.
Muir died feeling that
he'd been defeated by that,
and that was a great tragedy
at the end of his life.
But it's also true that
Hetch Hetchy would then go on
across the 20th century
as a kind of battle cry
that would inform
all wilderness, wild land,
parkland battles
from that moment on.
It looks like a defeat, and yet
what's interesting about it
is that in that defeat,
a whole series of people
began to wonder whether
the parks needed more protection
than they currently had.
That there needed to be
some greater rampart,
some greater wall that could
defend the parks
against a future
such controversy.
COYOTE: A proposal
that Muir had supported
now began gaining greater ground
across the nation--
to create an agency
within the federal government
whose sole job would be
to promote, administer,
and protect the national parks,
to make sure they fulfilled
their great promise
and endured
for countless generations.
MAN: Muir said...
MAN AS JOHN MUIR: As long as
I live, I will hear the birds
and the winds
and the waterfalls sing.
I'll interpret the rocks
and learn the language
of flood, of storm
and avalanche.
I'll make the acquaintance
of the wild gardens
and the glaciers
and get as near to the heart
of this world as I could.
And so I did.
I sauntered about
from rock to rock,
from grove to grove,
from stream to stream,
and whenever I met a new plant,
I would sit down beside it
for a minute or a day
to make its acquaintance,
hear what it had to tell.
I asked the boulders
where they had been
and whither they were going
and when night found me,
there I camped.
I took no more heed to save time
or to make haste
than did the trees or the stars.
This is true freedom,
a good practical
sort of immortality.